Data and information are essentially the same thing.
Data is the result of processing raw facts to reveal its meaning.
When data are entered into a form and saved, they are placed in the underlying database as knowledge.
Database programming languages receive all application requests and translate them into the complex operations required to fulfill those requests.
The DBMS reveals much of the database’s internal complexity to the application programs and users.
One disadvantage of the DBMS is that it increases the risk of data security breaches.
An operational database is sometimes referred to as an enterprise database.
Corporations use only structured data.
Field refers to a collection of related records.
Structural dependence exists when it is possible to make changes in the file structure without affecting the application program’s ability to access the data.
Data anomaly is defined as the condition in which all of the data in the database are consistent with the real-world events and conditions.
An advantage of database systems is that you needn't perform frequent updates and apply latest patches.
One advantage of a database system over previous data management approaches is that the database system is considerably less complex.
An implementation-ready data model needn't necessarily contain enforceable rules to guarantee the integrity of the data.
Even when a good database blueprint is available, an applications programmer’s view of the data should match that of the manager and the end user.
Database designers determine the data and information that yield the required understanding of the entire business.
Business rules apply to businesses and government groups, but not to other types of organizations such as religious groups or research laboratories.
A disadvantage of the relational database management system (RDBMS) is its inability to hide the complexities of the relational model from the user.
In an SQL-based relational database, each table is dependent on every other table.
In Chen notation, entities and relationships have to be oriented horizontally; not vertically.
The external model is the representation of the database as “seen” by the DBMS.
The hierarchical model is software-independent
The relational model is hardware-dependent and software-independent.
The order of the rows and columns is important to the DBMS.
Character data can contain any character or symbol intended for mathematical manipulation.
The row’s range of permissible values is known as its domain.
The idea of determination is unique to the database environment.
Only a single attribute, not multiple attributes, can define functional dependence.
The SELECT operator yields a vertical subset of a table.
In a natural join, the column on which the join was made occurs twice in the new table.
The one-to-many (1:M) relationship is easily implemented in the relational model by putting the foreign key of the “1” side in the table of the “many” side as a primary key.
The entity relationship model (ERM) is dependent on the database type.
The Crow’s Foot notation is less implementation-oriented than the Chen notation.
Software vendors have adopted the Chen representation because of its compact representation.
The Crow's Foot notation easily identifies multivalued attributes.
Composite attributes make it easier to facilitate detailed queries.
In Chen notation, there is no way to represent cardinality.
In implementation terms, an entity is existence-dependent if it has a mandatory primary key.
A weak relationship exists if the primary key of the related entity contains at least one primary key component of the parent entity.
Relationships between entities always operate in one direction.
The existence of a mandatory relationship indicates that the minimum cardinality is 0 or 1 for the mandatory entity.
Referential integrity and participation are both bidirectional, meaning that they must be addressed in both directions along a relationship.
Within a specialization hierarchy, a supertype can exist only within the context of a subtype.
A subtype contains attributes that are common to all of its supertypes.
Entity subtypes do not inherit the relationships in which the supertype entity participates.
In specialization hierarchies with multiple levels of supertype and subtypes, a lower-level subtype can inherit only a few of the attributes and relationships from its upper-level supertypes.
The property of a subtype discriminator enables an entity supertype to inherit the attributes and relationships of the subtype.
Disjoint subtypes are subtypes that contain nonunique subsets of the supertype entity set.
Overlapping subtypes are subtypes that contain a unique subset of the supertype entity set.
The function of the primary key is to describe an entity.
To model time-variant data, one must create a new entity in an M:N relationship with the original entity.
Normalization is a process that is used for changing attributes to entities.
A dependency of one nonprime attribute on another nonprime attribute is a partial dependency.
Dependencies that are based on only a part of a composite primary key are called transitive dependencies.
Data stored at their highest level of granularity are said to be atomic data.
A table is in BCNF if every determinant in the table is a foreign key.
Normalization purity is often easy to sustain in the modern database environment.
SQL is considered difficult to learn; its command set has a vocabulary of more than 300 words.
The COMMIT command does not permanently save all changes. In order to do that, you must use SAVE.
All SQL commands must be issued on a single line.
An alias cannot be used when a table is required to be joined to itself in a recursive query.
Oracle users can use the Access QBE (query by example) query generator.
Comparison operators cannot be used to place restrictions on character-based attributes.
You cannot insert a row containing a null attribute value using SQL.
Most SQL implementations yield case-insensitive searches.
SQL supports the conditional execution of procedures (IF-THEN-ELSE statements) that are typically supported by a programming language.
A persistent stored module is stored and executed on the database client machine.
Every PL/SQL block must be given a name.
Automating business procedures and automatically maintaining data integrity and consistency are trivial in a modern business environment.
Triggers can only be used to update table values.
A row-level trigger is assumed if we omit the FOR EACH ROW keywords and a statement-level trigger required the use of the FOR EACH ROW keyword.
MySQL allows multiple triggering conditions per trigger.
BEFORE means before the changes are made in memory but after the changes are permanently saved to disk.
Stored procedures must have at least one argument.
An explicit cursor must return two or more rows.