Data processing can be as simple as organizing data to reveal patterns.
Data constitute the building blocks of information.
Metadata describe the data characteristics and the set of relationships that links the data found within the database.
The only way to access the data in a database is through the DBMS.
A data warehouse can store data derived from many sources.
Structure is based on the type of processing to be performed on the data.
One disadvantage of a database system over previous data management approaches is increased costs.
A data model is usually graphical.
An implementation-ready data model should contain a description of the data structure that will store the end-user data.
Within the database environment, a data model represents data structures with the purpose of supporting a specific problem domain.
In the context of data models, an entity is a person, place, thing, or event about which data will be collected and stored.
Business rules must be rendered in writing.
In an SQL-based relational database, rows in different tables are related based on common values in common attributes.
Each row in the relational table is known as an entity instance or entity occurrence in the ER model.
M:N relationships are not appropriate in a relational model.
Today, most relational database products can be classified as object/relational.
The network model has structural level dependence.
The practical significance of taking the logical view of a database is that it serves as a reminder of the simple file concept of data storage.
You can think of a table as a persistent representation of a logical relation.
Each table in a relational database must have a primary key.
If the attribute (B) is functionally dependent on a composite key (A) but not on any subset of that composite key, the attribute (B) is fully functionally dependent on (A).
A null is created when you press the Enter key or the Tab key to move to the next entry without making a prior entry of any kind.
Depending on the sophistication of the application development software, nulls can create problems when functions such as COUNT, AVERAGE, and SUM are used.
RDBMSs enforce integrity rules automatically.
Relational algebra defines the theoretical way of manipulating table contents using relational operators.
The DIFFERENCE operator subtracts one table from the other.
The DIVIDE operation uses one single-column table (e.g., column “a”) as the divisor and one two-column table (e.g., columns “a” and “b”) as the dividend.
A data dictionary is sometimes described as “the database designer’s database” because it records the design decisions about tables and their structures.
As rare as 1:1 relationships should be, certain conditions absolutely require their use.
An entity in the entity relationship model corresponds to a table in the relational environment.
In the entity relationship model, a table row corresponds to an entity instance.
In the Chen and Crow’s Foot notations, an entity is represented with a rectangle containing the entity’s name.
In the original Chen notation, each attribute is represented by an oval with the attribute name connected to an entity rectangle with a line.
A composite identifier is a primary key composed of more than one attribute.
Connectivities and cardinalities are established by concise statements known as business rules.
A weak entity has a primary key that is partially or totally derived from the parent entity in the relationship.
In a 1:M relationship, to avoid the possibility of referential integrity errors, the data of the "1" side must be loaded first.
To implement a small database, a database designer must know the "1" and the "M" sides of each relationship and whether the relationships are mandatory or optional.
The entity supertype contains common characteristics, and the entity subtypes each contain their own unique characteristics.
Entity supertypes and subtypes are organized in a specialization hierarchy.
The relationships depicted within the specialization hierarchy are sometimes described in terms of “is-a” relationships.
One important inheritance characteristic is that all entity subtypes inherit their primary key attribute from their supertype.
At the implementation level, the supertype and its subtype(s) depicted in the specialization hierarchy maintain a 1:1 relationship.
An entity supertype can have disjoint or overlapping entity subtypes.
Implementing overlapping subtypes requires the use of one discriminator attribute for each subtype.
The completeness constraint can be partial or total.
Specialization is the top-down process of identifying lower-level, more specific entity subtypes from a higher-level entity supertype.
An entity cluster is a "virtual" entity type used to represent multiple entities and relationships in the ERD.
A design trap occurs when a relationship is improperly or incompletely identified and is therefore represented in a way that is not consistent with the real world.
Normalization works through a series of stages called normal forms.
In order to meet performance requirements, portions of the database design may need to be occasionally denormalized.
Denormalization produces a lower normal form.
The objective of normalization is to ensure that each table conforms to the concept of well-formed relations.
Relational models view data as part of a table or collection of tables in which all key values must be identified.
Repeating groups must be eliminated by ensuring that each row defines a single entity.
Dependency diagrams are very helpful in getting a bird’s-eye view of all the relationships among a table’s attributes.
All relational tables satisfy the 1NF requirements.
In the context of partial dependencies, data redundancies occur because every row entry requires duplication of data.
Since a partial dependency can exist only if a table's primary key is composed of several attributes, if a table in 1NF has a single-attribute primary key, then the table is automatically in 2NF.
It is possible for a table in 2NF to exhibit transitive dependency, where the primary key may rely on one or more nonprime attributes to functionally determine other nonprime attributes.
A table is in fourth normal form if it is in third normal form and has no independent multivalued dependencies.
Normalization represents a micro view of the entities within the ERD.
The combination of normalization and ER modeling yields a useful ERD, whose entities can be translated into appropriate table structures.
A database language enables the user to perform complex queries designed to transform the raw data into useful information.
The ANSI SQL standards are also accepted by the ISO.
Although SQL commands can be grouped together on a single line, complex command sequences are best shown on separate lines, with space between the SQL command and the command’s components.
You can select partial table contents by naming the desired fields and by placing restrictions on the rows to be included in the output.
String comparisons are made from left to right.
Date procedures are often more software-specific than other SQL procedures.
SQL allows the use of logical restrictions on its inquiries such as OR, AND, and NOT.
ANSI-standard SQL allows the use of special operators in conjunction with the WHERE clause.
The conditional LIKE must be used in conjunction with wildcard characters.
Some RDBMSs, such as Microsoft Access, automatically make the necessary conversions to eliminate case sensitivity.
The COUNT function is designed to tally the number of non-null "values" of an attribute, and is often used in conjunction with the DISTINCT clause.
Numeric functions take one numeric parameter and return one value.
A view is a virtual table based on a SELECT query.
A sequence is not associated with a table and can be dropped from a database with a DROP SEQUENCE command.
To remedy the lack of procedural functionality in SQL, and to provide some standardization within the many vendor offerings, the SQL-99 standard defined the use of persistent stored modules.
In Oracle, you can use the SQL*Plus command SHOW ERRORS to help you diagnose errors found in PL/SQL blocks.
The most useful feature of PL/SQL blocks is that they let a designer create code that can be named, stored, and executed by the DBMS.
The DECLARE section in the trigger is used to declare any variables used inside the trigger code.
A trigger is procedural SQL code that is automatically invoked by the RDBMS upon the occurrence of a given data manipulation event.
A statement-level trigger is assumed if a designer omits the FOR EACH ROW keywords.
Just like database triggers, stored procedures are stored in the database.
One of the major advantages of stored procedures is that they can be used to encapsulate and represent business transactions.